# Signals
- Doable in the beginning
- [Bash manual](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/Signals.html):
> When job control is not enabled, and Bash is waiting for a foreground command to complete, the shell receives keyboard-generated signals such as SIGINT (usually generated by ‘^C’) that users commonly intend to send to that command. This happens because the shell and the command are in the same process group as the terminal, and ‘^C’ sends SIGINT to all processes in that process group. See Job Control, for a more in-depth discussion of process groups.

- General reading:
[POSIX.1-2017 - System Interfaces volume - Signal concepts](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/functions/V2_chap02.html#tag_15_04)

## Ctrl + D
`C-D` in [Bash manual](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/Signals.html)

8.2.1 Readline Bare Essentials
C-d

    Delete the character underneath the cursor. 

Arguments ?
>8.2.4 Readline Arguments

>You can pass numeric arguments to Readline commands. Sometimes the argument acts as a repeat count, other times it is the sign of the argument that is significant. If you pass a negative argument to a command which normally acts in a forward direction, that command will act in a backward direction. For example, to kill text back to the start of the line, you might type ‘M-- C-k’.

>The general way to pass numeric arguments to a command is to type meta digits before the command. If the first ‘digit’ typed is a minus sign (‘-’), then the sign of the argument will be negative. Once you have typed one meta digit to get the argument started, you can type the remainder of the digits, and then the command. **For example, to give the C-d command an argument of 10, you could type ‘M-1 0 C-d’, which will delete the next ten characters on the input line**.

>8.4.3 Commands For Changing Text

end-of-file (usually C-d)

    The character indicating end-of-file as set, for example, by stty. If this character is read when there are no characters on the line, and point is at the beginning of the line, Readline interprets it as the end of input and returns EOF.
delete-char (C-d)

    Delete the character at point. If this function is bound to the same character as the tty EOF character, as C-d commonly is, see above for the effects.


## Ctrl + \
Probably SIGQUIT

