Documentation/Shell-functioning.md, before:

# Shell functioning
How the shell works according to [Shell Command Language](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/utilities/V3_chap02.html) (summarized and paraphrased)

## 1. Reads input
### Input sources
(see Requirements.md -> to clarify)
- From stdin
- From command line string (with `readline`)
- From a file

### Input characteristics
- length: unlimited

## 2. Tokenization
- Shell breaks input into tokens: **words** and **operators**
- Two modes of parsing:
	### 2.1. here-documents processing
	 => if an **io_here** token has been recognized by the grammar, one or more of the subsequent lines immediately following the next NEWLINE token form the body of one of more here-documents and shall be parsed according to the rules of Here-Document (LINK TO PARAGRAPH)
	### 2.2. [ordinary token recognition](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/utilities/V3_chap02.html#tag_18_03)
	break input into tokens by applying the first applicable rule below to the next character in its input.
	The token shall be from the current position in the input until a token is delimited according to one of the rules below; the characters forming the token are exactly those in the input, including any quoting characters.
	>If is indicated that a token is delimited, and no characters have been included in a token, processing shall continue until an actual token is delimited. => ?

	<br><br>**Rules**:
	#### 2.2.1. end of input
	IF 
	- end of input is recognized

	AND EITHER:
	- there is a current token
	=> delimit the current token
	
	OR:
	- there is no current token
	=> return the end-of-input indicator as the token
	#### 2.2.2. continued operator token and current character usable
	IF
	- previous character used as part of an operator
	- current character can be used with the current characters to form an operator
	- current character **not quoted** `=> ?`

	=> use character as part of that (operator) token
	#### 2.2.3. continued operator token and current character not usable
	IF
	- previous character used as part of an operator
	- current character cannot be used with the current characters to form an operator

	=> delimit the operator containing the previous character
	#### 2.2.4. backslash, single-quote, double-quote
	IF
	- the current character is backslash `\`, single-quote `'`, double-quote `"`
	- the current character is **not quoted** `=> ?`

	=> affects quoting for subsequent characters up to the end of the quoted text (see Quoting - LINK TO PARAGRAPH). During token recognition, no substitutions shall be actually performed, and the result token shall contain exactly the characters that appear in the input (except for <newline> joining) `=> ?`, unmodified, including any embedded or enclosing quotes or substitution operators, between the quote mark and the end of the quoted text. The token shall not be delimited by the end of the quoted field.
	#### 2.2.5. Parameter and arithmetic expansion, command substitution (`$` and '`')
	IF
	- the current character is an unquoted 
	
	=> identify introductory sequence :
	- `$` or `${` : [parameter expansion](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/utilities/V3_chap02.html#tag_18_06_02)
	- `$(` or '\`' : command substitution **=> don't implement**
	- `$((` : arithmetic expansion **=> don't implement**
	read sufficient input to determine the end of the unit to be expanded (see expansion sections)

Commit message:

Documentation: requirements, shell functioning (token recognition)

Documentation/Shell-functioning.md, after:

# Shell functioning
How the shell works according to [Shell Command Language](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/utilities/V3_chap02.html) (summarized and paraphrased)

## 1. Reads input
### Input sources
(see Requirements.md -> to clarify)
- From stdin
- From command line string (with `readline`)
- From a file

### Input characteristics
- length: unlimited

## 2. Tokenization
- Shell breaks input into tokens: **words** and **operators**
- Two modes of parsing:
	### 2.1. here-documents processing
	 => if an **io_here** token has been recognized by the grammar, one or more of the subsequent lines immediately following the next NEWLINE token form the body of one of more here-documents and shall be parsed according to the rules of Here-Document (LINK TO PARAGRAPH)
	### 2.2. [ordinary token recognition](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/utilities/V3_chap02.html#tag_18_03)
	break input into tokens by applying the first applicable rule below to the next character in its input.
	The token shall be from the current position in the input until a token is delimited according to one of the rules below; the characters forming the token are exactly those in the input, including any quoting characters.
	>If is indicated that a token is delimited, and no characters have been included in a token, processing shall continue until an actual token is delimited. => ?

	<br><br>**Rules**:
	#### 2.2.1. end of input
	IF 
	- end of input is recognized

	AND	EITHER:
	- there is a current token

	=> delimit the current token
	
	OR:
	- there is no current token

	=> return the end-of-input indicator as the token

	#### 2.2.2. continued operator token and current character usable
	IF
	- previous character used as part of an operator
	- current character can be used with the current characters to form an operator
	- current character **not quoted** `=> ?`

	=> use character as part of that (operator) token

	#### 2.2.3. continued operator token and current character not usable
	IF
	- previous character used as part of an operator
	- current character cannot be used with the current characters to form an operator

	=> delimit the operator containing the previous character

	#### 2.2.4. backslash, single-quote, double-quote
	IF
	- the current character is single-quote `'` (**implement**), double-quote `"` (**implement**), or backslash `\` (**don't implement**)
	- the current character is **not quoted** `=> ?`

	=> affects quoting for subsequent characters up to the end of the quoted text (see Quoting - LINK TO PARAGRAPH). During token recognition, no substitutions shall be actually performed, and the result token shall contain exactly the characters that appear in the input (except for <newline> joining) `=> ?`, unmodified, including any embedded or enclosing quotes or substitution operators, between the quote mark and the end of the quoted text. The token shall not be delimited by the end of the quoted field.

	#### 2.2.5. Parameter and arithmetic expansion, command substitution (`$` and '`')
	IF
	- the current character is an unquoted `$` or '`'
	
	=> identify introductory sequence :
	- `$` or `${` : [parameter expansion](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/utilities/V3_chap02.html#tag_18_06_02) **=> implement partially**
	- `$(` or '\`' : command substitution **=> don't implement**
	- `$((` : arithmetic expansion **=> don't implement**

	=> read sufficient input to determine the end of the unit to be expanded (see [parameter expansion](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/utilities/V3_chap02.html#tag_18_06_02))

	=> recursion (nested $) **=> don't implement**

	=> The token shall not be delimited by the end of the substitution.
	
	See Requirements.md#Metacharacter_handling
 
	#### 2.2.6. 
	IF
	- the current character is unquoted
	- the current character can be used as the first character of a new operator

	=> delimit the current token, if any
	
	=> use the current character as the beginning of the next (operator) token
